=pod

=head1 NAME

Unix::Groups::FFI - Interface to Unix group syscalls

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Unix::Groups::FFI qw(getgroups setgroups getgrouplist initgroups);

  my @gids = getgroups;
  setgroups(@gids);
  my @gids = getgrouplist($username, $gid);
  initgroups($username, $gid);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module provides a L<FFI|FFI::Platypus> interface to several syscalls
related to Unix groups, including L<getgroups(2)>, L<setgroups(2)>,
L<getgrouplist(3)>, and L<initgroups(3)>. As such it will only work on
Unix-like operating systems.

=head1 FUNCTIONS

All functions are exported individually on demand. A function will not be
available for export if the system does not implement the corresponding
syscall.

=head2 getgroups

  my @gids = getgroups;

Returns the supplementary group IDs of the current process via L<getgroups(2)>.

=head2 setgroups

  setgroups(@gids);

Sets the supplementary group IDs for the current process via L<setgroups(2)>.
Attempting to set more than C<NGROUPS_MAX> groups (32 before Linux 2.6.4 or
65536 since Linux 2.6.4) will result in an C<EINVAL> error. Passing an empty
list of group IDs may result in unspecified behavior. The C<CAP_SETGID>
L<capability|capabilities(7)> or equivalent privilege is required.

=head2 getgrouplist

  my @gids = getgrouplist($username, $gid);
  my @gids = getgrouplist($username);

Returns the group IDs for all groups of which C<$username> is a member, also
including C<$gid> (without repetition), via L<getgrouplist(3)>. If C<$username>
does not exist on the system, it is unspecified what will be returned but it
will include C<$gid>.

As a special case, the primary group ID of C<$username> is included if C<$gid>
is not passed (an C<EINVAL> error will result if the username does not exist).

=head2 initgroups

  initgroups($username, $gid);
  initgroups($username);

Initializes the supplementary group access list for the current process to all
groups of which C<$username> is a member, also including C<$gid> (without
repetition), via L<initgroups(3)>. If C<$username> does not exist on the
system, it is unspecified what the supplementary group access list will be set
to but it will include C<$gid>. The C<CAP_SETGID> L<capability|capabilities(7)>
or equivalent privilege is required.

As a special case, the primary group ID of C<$username> is included if C<$gid>
is not passed (an C<EINVAL> error will result if the username does not exist).

=head1 ERROR HANDLING

All functions will throw an exception containing the syscall error message in
the event of an error. L<perlvar/"$!"> will also have been set by the syscall,
so you could check it after trapping the exception for finer exception
handling:

  use Unix::Groups::FFI 'setgroups';
  use Syntax::Keyword::Try;
  use Errno qw(EINVAL EPERM ENOMEM);

  try { setgroups((0)x2**16) }
  catch {
    if ($! == EINVAL) {
      die 'Tried to set too many groups';
    } elsif ($! == EPERM) {
      die 'Insufficient privileges to set groups';
    } elsif ($! == ENOMEM) {
      die 'Out of memory';
    } else {
      die $@;
    }
  }

See the documentation for each syscall for details on the possible error codes.

=head1 BUGS

Report any issues on the public bugtracker.

=head1 AUTHOR

Dan Book <dbook@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is Copyright (c) 2018 by Dan Book.

This is free software, licensed under:

  The Artistic License 2.0 (GPL Compatible)

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<POSIX>, L<credentials(7)>, L<capabilities(7)>

=cut
